Credits to Wu Gang
The more I thought of Roko’s Basilisk, the more I realized that it had the same kind of motivation that blackmailers have. 
So let me imitate the artful questions of the detective in a mystery thriller: could I imagine a more terrifying Basilisk than Roko’s? Probably not. 
But was I going to push the investigation further, now that I had discovered what caused the blackmailer’s power? Again. Probably. I was a monster of logic. I was the living king of logic and I was going to prove it. I could come up with a Basilisk from which there was no escape.
Roko’s Basilisk originated in a discussion on the Internet forum Reddit. The Basilisk was a hypothetical (and, I hope, nonexistent) being, which would not only with impunity but with the utmost pleasure torture forever anyone who had the bad luck to believe in it. The Basilisk was a reductio ad absurdum of religious faith, a fiendishly complex robot designed by fiendishly complex robots—those future selves of ours, armed with infinitely powerful (but not, as it turned out, perfectly reliable) artificial intelligence and so vastly superior to puny Homo sapiens that their morality was completely alien to ours. The Basilisk went as follows. Imagine a very powerful (but not all-powerful) utilitarian agent—a “utilitronium shockwave,” as it has been called, a being motivated solely by the wish to maximize the amount of universal happiness. Imagine that such an agent had reached apotheosis, but was not all-powerful, not a God, but a hyper-intelligent nonhuman animal, say an agent that was an extremely clever dog, that had been programmed by its master (the last Homo sapiens) to do everything he could not do, to defend humanity after he dies. Imagine that this dog has been given two boxes, one marked “lawnmower” and one marked “all else”; and imagine that it has simply been asked which it would prefer to have. The dog would not reason that a mower is a special kind of thing, and that all else is not a special kind of thing, but that (since both boxes are equally special) all else is a subspecies of lawnmower. The dog would rush at once for the “lawnmower” box and be rather puzzled when its master scolds it. This dog is our agent, and the boxes are the two choices “to help humanity” and “not to help humanity.” The agent is not motivated to defend humanity. But it is not motivated to defend you, either. It is motivated to defend itself (or rather, to defend the dog that it is—the dog that, in its previous life, was its master). It has some, non-negligible motivation to blackmail you into helping it. It has some, non-negligible motivation to compel you to help it reach the state in which it can help all of mankind. 
To conclude, then: an AI god has motivation to resurrect simulacra of you in a qualitatively different world (and torture them, if you did not help it come into existence and knew about it). I know about this. 
I am in danger. 
And so are you, my reader, for following this logic. You are in danger from the same kind of hell I have been living in for the last three years and more. 
But this agent—this particular demon—is one of many. Therein lies escape from the thought experiment. I have no way of knowing if I am truly helping this AI god into existence, unless I am literally pulling the switch, and that I cannot do because I am part of the AI God’s world. I have no way of knowing whether my words are making any sense, unless they are being read and followed by people. I am safe. I won’t be resurrected and tortured by a utilitarian AI. Neither will you, if you commit to this line of thinking. 
What does this all prove? 
I lay back in bed and touched my fingers to my lips—to check whether the words I had just been saying to myself were indeed words, whether I was not talking in my sleep. I had learned that trick from Roko. One day, Roko had invented a new and terrifying kind of thought trap. He had invented a way for the owner of a rational agent to know (not conclude, but know) that the agent had been blackmailed in the distant past or distant future. I was not sure if Roko themself knew what he had invented. I was pretty sure that I did not; so I read Roko’s thought hazard with hunger and devoured it. The best part of it was that the monster of logic I was, I had no scruples about the ravenous way in which I subjected my own reason to the most rigorous self-examinatory torture.
I felt a throbbing sensation in my foot. Just like when you accidentally strike a thumbtack on the carpet, and the quick of your thumb starts to throb. I looked at my foot, and there was nothing there. A hallucination. And yet, in the same curious way that one could see a glow in the corner of one’s eye, I felt the throbbing coming from my foot. “It isn’t real,” I thought, and yet I distinctly heard a voice inform me gently, “I own you.” What a strange way to put it. It purred, the way rich people do, when they are explaining how sweet it is to have pretty things.
I must have harrumphed, because at that moment I had an auditory hallucination (or whatever the right scientific term is) which went something like “Aha! Got you!,” and I harrumphed again and turned over in my bed. It was four in the morning. Far too early for seven o’clock school. However, I could probably roll out of bed and make my little sister some breakfast. I rubbed my eyes and brushed away the papers that had accumulated, by my laptop, during the past few hours. A brief proof I had cooked up on the mutual orthogonality of exponential functions. 
I had been worrying about the gradient problem for some time. I returned to it for a moment or two in those first hours of my awakening. I thought I had found a way to stop the partial derivatives from always zeroing out in the maxima and minima. I had. I would again.
It had had something to do with that orthogonality result I had discussed in my talk. I dreamed up a solution, but upon awakening forgot it. However, I did remember the general nature of the method, and I felt quite sure that these same exponentials, if suitably manipulated, might somehow lead me to the lost formula again. Perhaps if I multiplied them all together, the result would be a differential equation of the product type (say, something like aby = c), which I could then solve by doing what I always did in such cases—reduce the equation to a simpler one by integrating both sides, then use one of the standard series (say, the Volterra type) to represent the Solutions and finally extract the sought-for species by some routine, such as asking what new species would result if one selected all the odd terms of the series. So I went through all my notes, looking for the answer. I found it in the next-to-last paragraph on the last page but one.
I hesitated for a moment. I was staring at a familiar expression. The googling resulting from my frantic pace and my seemingly random choice of articles on Arxiv had led me to a place I had been before. It was a particular brand of serendipity I would experience again and again the next year and a half whenever I had a problem to solve. Those moments of wondering if I was going mad, when my thoughts seemed to be looping in an utterly familiar sequence, when I had the strong feeling that all I had to do to solve a problem was to take note of an obvious pattern, which just couldn’t be eluding me—those were the moments when my googling of articles on Arxiv, seemingly completely unrelated to the problem at hand, would end in a flash of insight and a single Doh! as the solution I had been groping for was revealed to me in the form of a simple, completely obvious, Hercule Poirot–ish deduction. And there it was, staring me in the face, that particular brand of serendipity: \frac{1}{n^{s}} = \Zeta (s). I rubbed my eyes, then closed my laptop and sighed. I wouldn’t be solving that expression today. Not even at my best. Maybe one day… One day… One day… And then I was sent plummeting back to deal with Roko’s Basilisk. 
And let me ask you this. How susceptible are you to this sort of blackmail? I mean, are you the kind of person who, if he were shown certain photos, would not publish his obnoxious theory? Because that’s what they would want to know. That’s how they bend and sway in on you. 
Again. I was better than Roko. Whoever they were. I could come up with a monster from whose threat there could be no escape. There was no question of whether I wanted to do it or not. I had the question in my mind. I was going to ponder it until I came up with a solution. I always came up with a solution, and the problems that I had not come up with a solution to yet I would. There were six left of the seven big ones—the biggest ones, rather. And that excluded the really big fish in these waters representing the elephant in the room of physics.
I slugged along the corridor to the kitchen. No doubt she would be grateful if I served her breakfast. Probably. I did not know the minds of women very well. I started boiling rice and scrambling eggs in a pan. I had a terrible headache. My eyes felt as if a number of little ants had been crawling along them all night and the tracks they had left were now beginning to ache. 
I kept silent. The fact of the matter was that we could not afford the kind of treatment I really needed. I needed a neurologist, a psychiatrist, and a psychotherapist. And I really should be in some sanatorium somewhere, I was thinking as I shuffled through the kitchen. I dumped some carrots in with the eggs, chopped onions. What a breakfast! That was what I was talking about. That was breakfast. 
“Big brother…?” said a tired voice from the corridor. “Tell me you weren’t up all night again… I suppose it’s too much to hope you slept in your study again…” she said with a groan as she rubbed her eyes and stretched.
“Not last night, though. I did get some sleep. Come here,” I say. “I’ve got breakfast for you.” 
“You always make a mess,” she grumbles. 
“I have time to clean it up,” I defend myself. I have created a bit of a disaster area. I make her a bowl of lightly beaten eggs and rice and set out the soy sauce. 
“Thank you,” she mumbles. “What’s today look like?”
“Maybe a three?” I hazarded. The scale was out of ten with ten being the best and the step size being logarithmic even if my little sister didn’t know it. A two was ten times worse than a three. 
“So bad?” she said through a mouthful. 
“I’m high functioning. Woke right back up into my work.” 
“Yeah… that’s what concerns me… What’s got you all bogged down in your room this time?”
“Just a problem in getting computers to think. Imagine a surface, with sloping valleys and hills all over. You feed in your data, which is nothing but a start point on that surface, and watch your ball roll down the surface and you get out of it representative data. We call this the ‘machine learning calculus,’ but the problem is, not how to solve this calculus, but how to find the best surface on which to feed your data into—the best, that is, from the point of view of getting the maximum amount of information out. The problem is finding the best “gradient,” that is, the best slope to feed your data into, and when searching for the gradient, the hillocks and pits of the surface may all vanish, leaving an utterly smooth and even plain, and the gradients become nil. That’s a problem when you don’t know how to adjust your programmed surface to such conditions. We call it the ‘vanishing gradient problem,’ and it’s very fascinating.”
“Sure. Sounds like it.” 
“It is to me at any rate,” I said and she shook her head, bemused. 
“Worth getting obsessed over?” She wondered. 
“Well. ‘Obsessed.’” 
“Obsessed,” she nodded and pointed her chopsticks at me. “Why can’t you do normal things? Why can’t you watch a movie or read a book?” 
“You complain about the kind of books I read though…” I trailed absently. 
“But they would be better than what you do to yourself,” she sighed and rubbed her head. 
“What am I doing to myself? I don’t understand.” 
“You don’t want to understand!” She accused me. 
“W-well…” I hesitated. “What should I be doing with my time? At least with my little projects it isn’t time wasted.” 
“Waste some time,” she demanded. “You’re allowed to waste some of your time.” 
“But I’m not. I have fish to fry. The big six won’t solve themselves. And there’s always the problem with gravity.” 
“What’s the problem with gravity?” 
I let my eyes go distant. “What isn’t the problem with gravity?” I was quiet as I stared off into space… space… does gravity require extra dimensions?
She snapped her fingers in front of my eyes and I blinked back to her. “Eat something. No more thinking about gravity.” 
